Plan


Abstract

In this project we tackle the problem of restoring the complete history of a 2D geological 
subsurface. It is represented by a 2D sketch and we will produce a backward animation, starting
at the section current state going in the past while detecting and un-doing geological events
that possibly occured throught its history. Several scenarios will be taken into account while keeping
only the most plausible ones. The animation is the result of running a simulation using mass spring
systems mapped on nthe different part of the cross-section.

I) Introduction

Hand-drawn sketches are useful in geology for illustrating and validating hypotheses. 
For instance they can be used to reconstruct a 3D view of the subsurface by drawing a 2D top view of the current terrain (2) or 2D vertical cross-sections. 
Futhermore they can also be used to restore the subsurface history using 2D slices (vertical cross-sections) Moreover by analysing the different layers and faults, the geologist is able to reconstruct the geometrical evolution specially provoqued by compression or extension of the rock masses before, after or during deposit and erosion of the sediments and basement rocks. 
The resulting drawing is called a restoration ($ref$) (a single of sequential geometric description of the cross-section).
However those drawings are rather limited. On top of representing only one 2D cross-section of the terrain being investigated, they can only represent hypotheses on the underground geometry at discrete time steps, rather than a complete continuous history. In addition insuring consistency between these sketches over time heavily depends on available data, maturity of the regional geological interpretation and the skills of the geologist, i.e. his knowledge on the way rocks and sediments fold, on the way faults propagates and produce sliding and displacements, and on the way sediments are deposited or eroded, etc...
Building, Exploring and comparing different hypotheses of kinematic restoration is very difficult, if not impossible, with the current pipeline ($workflow$). 
Recently, it was proposed to organize geological sketches into story trees to present and compare different interpretations of the formation of a given terrain (6) but the task remains labor-intensive, requiring the geologist to draw every sketch in the story tree. Moreover, even while being skillful and experienced, it’s hardly impossible to a geologist to express a continuum of the deformation of a geological cross-section with available tools.
In this internship, we would like to follow up on this line of research by proposing methods for inferring a geological story tree directly from very few geological sketches, and presenting the resulting tree of possible geological stories as an animation.


II) State of the Art

Like mentioned above, several continuous animation tools for subsurface evolution over time are already available. They work on the assumption that sedimentary layers were in a horizontal configuration at the starting position which is a well used hypothesis in geology. With this assumption and using the Coulomb prism theory ($ref$) sofware such as SLAMTec or OptumG2 (refs ?) offer the possibility to mechanically simulate the compression of a geological cross-section.
The goal of this kind of forward simulation is to validate a restoration that had been generated from a present dating 2D section and see if the result matches with it. This kind of simulation is configurable by several parameters such as the erosion and the friction coefficients.
Geological cross-section restoration can be obtained thanks to geometrical tools (refs ?). Those tools deal with each block (soil section between two faults) one by one and flatten each layer while conserving their respective area or length. After the flattening operation the user can manually stick the new block to its neighbours with the corresponding layers facing each other. Here is an example of restoration taken from Chartreuse slice:

III) Geological Structure Representation and Analysis
	How do we represent a Cross Section.
	A Cross-Section contains several parts : 
		-It contains parts of geological layers => floors or moduli
		- A geological layer is a layer composed of the same kind of material.
		In our case we deal with sementary layers. It implies that each material is caracterized by its temporal existance.	
	   	- Faults which can be seen as discontinuities in the XS
		- Blocks which represent the groups of floors delimited by faults.
		- Each Material is caracterised by a Young Modulus which describe its plasticy and elesticity,
		an age period and a friction coefficient.

Drawing analysis. As Mentionned before our input is a colored vpaint drawing which is composed of face, edges and vetices stored in 
a vertex complex graphics strucutre ($ref$). Passage du sujet.
In the drawing we color faces which represent the different moduli of the XS with the color being its material. moduli of the same color have the same material, therefore they belong to the same layer. We represent interlayers by a white edge while the other contour egades are black. Gaps inside a block are also represented in white and are automatically detected as gaps meaning that erosion impacted this region for sure. line could be added to give hint on the rosion.

Then we have to extract the structure out of this drawing. Meaning that we have to identify the different blocks, moduli, faults and materials from the drawing. To do so we proceed this way: the vpaint output format is an xml file which describe our drawing in terms
of faces, edges and vertices. Each faces has a cycling orientation which is clockwise or counterclockwise but for building and manipulating our structure more easelly we choose that all of our layer will be first read clockwiselly and from the most recent (the higher in general) to the oldest. In fact it is an easy task to wirte the layers in the correct way but we need to find out which layers belong to the same block. To solve this issue we will use the interlayers and then the white edges. Two layers belong to the same block if they share a commun white edge. Thanks to this method we build our blocks. we can notice that the youngest and the oldest layer have just one interlayer that make them part of a block. However we will describe our layer with four part of the contours the upper interlayer, the righedges, the bottom interlayer and the left edges. Consequently for these two specific layer we will compute automatically the lacking interlayer (limitation it is not always good).
	

IV) Story Telling

As we mentionned before, geologist are usually able to restore the history of the cross section by using several geometrical and simulation tools.
However then only get one final state of the section whcih represents what was the XS before any techtonic movement. Here we are interested in what 
happened between today XS and the restoration. Indeed most of the time there are several scenarios that lead the initial state to the restoration.
This is what we want in this project. We want to explore the most plausibles scenarios and see the resulting animation of exploration.
To do so we wiil propose to the user to undo geological events at each time step. We can count already five events to undo : faults, erosion, sedimentation, folding and compaction. Those event will be automatically detected and resbored. In order to solve the issue properlly we'll use two graphs:
	-Story graph
	-Event graph

The Story graph represents the event paths we can run the simulation on. a node represents the list of event we can simulate at time t and an edge represents the event simulated between two nodes. Event graph used in the creation of this graph. It is the graph the user will explorer to see the animation of as many scenarios he wants to see.

Each event has a pre condition and and postcondition and will finish in a state.
Also a event can be have the special property to be dynamic meaining that it will be created during the simulation and not at 
the graphs creation.

The event graph shows time dependencies between geological events. An event is represented by a node and an edge represents a dependency. It is also computed automatically but it can be edited using information provided by the user. Has it contains only dpendencies

Only 4 out of the 5 event have been treated, the compaction will be reserved for later.
Describe the 4 events:


Faults: subdivided into modulus event

Erode: two types

Sediment:

Fold:



-Build a story graph of simulated events until no more event can be simulated (simulation end)
-Use user information to reduce the complexity (eg: Materials’ages)
-Use geological knowledge to reduce the complexity (eg: Fault hierarchy)
-At least 5 events to simulate: fault playing, applying external forces (de-compression de-extension), compaction, sedimentation and erosion.

-Two graphs to use in the story telling
	- Event graph: 
	- Story graph: 
V) Simulation

VI) Results

VII) Conclusion

glossary
	
Faults: extensive, inverse (compress), décrochement

Floor, Modulus.

Blocks;

Cross section, 2D slice.

Material.

Young Modulus.

Event: unFolding, unErode, unSediment, un
